PREDICTING LIFE EXPECTANCY USING MACHINE LEARNING

1.INTRODUCTION:
1.1 Overview:
Life expectancy is the average number of years a person in a population could
expect to live after age x. It is the life table parameter most commonly used to
compare the survival experience of populations. The age most often selected to
make comparisons is 0.0 (i.e., birth), although, for many substantive and policy
analyses, other ages such as 65+ and 85+ are more relevant and may be used (e.g.,
for determining person-years of Medicare and Social Security benefit entitlement).
In order to predict life expectancy rate of a given country, we will be using
Machine Learning algorithms to draw inferences from the given dataset and give
an output. For better usability by the customer, we are also going to be creating a
UI for the user to interact with using Node-Red.
1.2 Purpose
Life expectancy is perhaps the most important measure of health. Life expectancy
increases due to healthcare improvements like the introduction of vaccines, the
development of drugs or positive behavior changes like the reduction in smoking
or drinking rates.
Life expectancy is a statistical measure of the average time a human being is
expected to live, Life expectancy depends on various factors: Regional variations,
Economic Circumstances, Sex Differences, Mental Illnesses, Physical Illnesses,
Education, Year of their birth and other demographic factors. This problem
statement provides a way to predict average life expectancy of people living in a
country when various factors such as year, GDP, education, alcohol intake of
people in the country, expenditure on healthcare system and some specific disease
related deaths that happened in the country are given.
2. LITERATURE SURVEY
2.1 Existing Solution:
As a result of the evolution of biotechnologies and related technologies such as the
development of sophisticated medical equipment, humans are able to enjoy longer
life expectancies than previously before. Predicting a human’s life expectancy has
been a long-term question to humankind. Many calculations and research have
been done to create an equation despite it being impractical to simplify these
variables into one equation.
Currently there are various smart devices and applications such as smartphone apps
and wearable devices that provide wellness and fitness tracking. Some apps
provide health related data such as sleep monitoring, heart rate measuring, and
calorie expenditure collected and processed by the devices and servers in the cloud.
However no existing works provide the Personalized Life expectancy.
2.2 Proposed Solution:
he project tries to build a model based on the given dataset. The first step was to
clean the data, this included detecting and dealing with both missing values and
outliers. The variables and dataset were given a general description so that a better
understanding of what the variables mean could be gathered. Then both explicit
and inexplicit missing values were detected. Inexplicit missing values were values
that didn't make sense for a variable given the nature of the data.
Our first step in this project is DATA PRE PROCESSING , is a crucial step that
helps enhance the quality of data to promote the extraction of meaningful insights
from the data. It refers to the technique of preparing the raw data to make it
suitable for a building and training. We will drop required columns which will not
be used in Regression. Analyzing data sets to summarize their main characteristics,
often with visual methods is done. We build coefficient matrix and we obtain
boxplots to analyze the outliers.
We train our regression models we will need to first split up our data into an A
array that contains the features to train on, and a B array with the target variable,
here it is "Life Expectancy column". We split the data into a training set and a
testing set. We will train out model on the training set and then use the test set to
evaluate the model and the best model is chosen to evaluate the predictions.
3. THEORITICAL ANALYSIS
Hardware/Software Designing:
Project Requirements:
i) Functional Requirements:
To be able to predict the life expectancy accurately using Machine
Learning models.
ii)Technical Requirements:
Any working laptop/PC with minimum 2.2Ghz processor and at least
8GB of memory with an Internet connection.
iii) Software Requirements:
a) Python
b) IBM Cloud
c) IBM Watson
Model Designing (Watson Studio) :
Steps: Open Watson studio => New Project => Create an empty Project => Give
project name => Click Create => Add to Project => Notebook
4.Cost and Budget
The costs of production includes infrastructure costs (cloud compute, data
storage), integration costs (data pipeline development, API development,
documentation) and maintenance costs. We will estimate these costs for a
12 months period.
6.Limitation
If you feed a model poorly, then it will only give you poor results. This can
manifest itself in two ways: lack of data, and lack of good data. Many
machine learning algorithms require large amounts of data before they
begin to give useful results.
7. Conclusion
Our research shows that machine learning techniques offer a feasible and
promising approach to predicting life expectancy. The research has potential
for real-life applications, such as supporting timely recognition of the right
moment to start Advance Care Planning.
Even though the model’s performance is far from perfect, we consider this
work to be among the first steps in a line of research that has much potential
for clinical applications, for several reasons: good prognostication has the
potential to contribute significantly to end-of-life decision making, therefore
we believe that any increase in prognostic accuracy is worth persuing.
Additionally, human prognostication is costly, time-consuming, requires
medical expertise, and is a subjective task.
